hi a quick forward before we had started
I wrote the script for this video in
maybe February or March of last year in
response to an article Steven Pinker
wrote for popular science magazine which
was basically an extract from his new
book enlightenment now I ended up not
publishing that video because I thought
it was kind of mean-spirited and
sarcastic in places and I didn't want to
be that kind of youtuber I figured
Pinker is on the side of the angels as
it were and there'd be a retraction or
correction issued before long like we
heard from your deGrasse Tyson but it's
now been almost a year and Pinker has
stood by this work in response to
criticism so here we go Steven Pinker is
a cognitive psychologist and an
award-winning popular science author his
books tend to be carefully researched
and well thought out books which have
really influenced the public
conversation about various scientific
topics how the mind works the relative
roles of nature and nurture and human
psychology and behavior and society and
social progress his latest book is
titled enlightenment now which advances
amongst other things one of Pinker's
main points a point which i think is
true and important and not widely enough
believed which is that things are on the
hold good and getting better everybody's
always talking about how everything is
terrible and society is on the wrong
path and everything is going down the
drain but if you look at almost anything
you can measure it's getting better
crime is down violence is down you know
war is down infant mortality is way down
disease is down generally speaking
people are happier more prosperous and
living in better conditions than they
ever have been the statistics on this
are pretty clear things do seem to be
getting better and in spite of this a
lot of people have a tendency to be
unreasonably pessimistic about the
future it can be pretty aggravating so
if you can't tell I'd quite like Steven
Pinker he's the kind of person who if I
didn't know much about a subject and I
heard that he'd written an article about
that subject in popular science magazine
I would think oh good I can read that
article and it will give me a good
understanding of that subject but I
think you can tell from the setup here
that that was not the case with this
piece so the article is titled we're
told to fear robots but why do we think
they'll turn on us with the subtitle the
robot uprising is a myth Pinker starts
the article by talking about this fact
that things are generally getting better
and a lot of people seem to want to
think that things are getting
there's a popular narrative that says
even though technology seems to be
making our lives better
what if we're actually on our way to
some disaster and technology is actually
going to be terrible for us and we just
don't realize it yet and it seems that
Pinker sees concern about AI risk as
just more of the same more of this just
general purpose technology pessimism is
it though I'm sure it's part of the
reason for the popularity of the idea
I've certainly talked to people who seem
to think that way but when it comes to
deciding whether a I risk is a real
concern I think this is a weak argument
I'm generally very wary of arguments
that talk about people's psychology and
their motivations for making a claim
rather than talking about the claim
itself to demonstrate you can make a
very similar argument and say well
Steven Pinker has spent many years of
his life railing against this sort of
general pessimism and because this is
kind of his thing he's inclined to see
it everywhere he looks and so when he
sees people who actually have an
understanding of the technical subject
matter raising serious safety concerns
he's inclined to just dismiss it as more
of the same Luddite pessimism because
that's what he knows that's what he
expects to see is that what's actually
happened I don't know maybe but I think
it's a weak argument to make the fact
that people might have reasons to want
to say that AI is a risk doesn't mean
that it isn't and the fact that Steven
Pinker might be inclined to dismiss such
concerns as this kind of reflexive
pessimism doesn't mean that it isn't so
these are just bolvar ism and we should
get down to the actual technical issues
so what are the actual arguments put
forward by the article before we start
in on that I just want to say
summarizing arguments is difficult
summarizing arguments fairly is
especially difficult and I'm not trying
to construct strongmen here but I might
by accident I would encourage everyone
to read the original article there's a
link in the description but I know most
of you won't and that's okay okay so one
of the first points that the article
makes when it gets to actual arguments
is it says among the smart people who
aren't losing sleep are most experts in
artificial intelligence and most experts
in human intelligence this is kind of an
appeal to Authority but I think that's
totally legitimate here the opinions of
AI experts are important evidence about
AI risk but is it actually true do most
a AI researchers not think that advanced
AI is a significant risk well just
recently a survey was published and in
fact I made a whole video about it
so I'll link to that video and the paper
in the description gray said Al surveyed
all of the researchers who published
work at the 2015 nips and ICML
conferences this is a reasonable
cross-section of high-level AI
researchers these are people who have
published in some of the best
conferences on AI like I say I made a
whole video about this but the single
question that I want to draw your
attention to is this one does Stewart
Russell's argument for why a highly
advanced AI might pose a risk point at
an important problem so the argument
that's being referred to by this
question is more or less the argument
that I've been making on this channel
the general AI safety concern argument
all of the reasons why alignment and AI
safety research is necessary so do the
AI experts agree with that well 11% of
them think no it's not a real problem
19 percent think no it's not an
important problem
but the remainder 70% of the AI experts
agree that this is at least a moderately
important problem now I don't know how
many of them are losing sleep but I
would say that the implication of the
article's claim that AI researchers
don't think AI risk is a serious concern
it's just factually not true AI experts
are concerned about this and the thing
that Strange's the article quotes from
is nom as a computer scientist but the
only time anyone is referred to as an AI
expert is this quote at the end from
Stuart Russell that name should be
familiar he's the guy posing the
argument in the survey the AI expert who
Pinker quotes kind of giving the
impression that they're on the same side
of this debate is not at all the thing
that astonishes me about this is just
how little research would have been
needed to spot this mistake if you're
wondering about Stuart Russell's opinion
you might read something he's written on
the subject if you're kind of lazy you
might just read the abstracts if you're
very lazy and you just want to get a
quick feel for the basic question is
Stuart Russell worried about existential
risks from artificial intelligence you
might just go to his website and look at
the titles of his recent publications
her these academics with their jargon
how are we supposed to decipher what
they really think anyway the next point
the article makes is that the arguments
for AI risk rely on an oversimplified
conception of intelligence that they
think of intelligence as this sort of
magical one-dimensional thing that gives
you power it's just like animals have
some of it humans have more
and AI would have even more and so it's
dangerous the article makes the point
that intelligence is multifaceted and
multi-dimensional human intelligence is
not monolithic it isn't this single
thing which automatically gives you
effectiveness in all domains and that's
true it's an important point and I think
sometimes when communicating about this
stuff to the public people oversimplify
this fact but the article seems to use
this to suggest that general
intelligence is not a thing or the
generality is not a thing that all
intelligence is an accumulation of a
number of small sort of narrow specific
abilities he lists some things that
human intelligence can do find food win
friends and influence people charm
prospective mates bring up children move
around the world and pursue other human
obsessions and pastimes and yet these
are pretty much all things that animals
also do to some extent but they aren't
the limits of human intelligence human
beings do definitely seem to have some
general intelligence there's some
ability we have which allows us to act
intelligently in an unusually broad
range of domains including domains which
are quite different from what our
ancestors experienced things which our
brains didn't evolve specifically to do
like we can learn how to play games like
chess and go to do very intelligent
manipulation of these pretty arbitrary
systems which we invented we can learn
how to drive cars although there were no
cars in the ancestral environment and in
fact we can learn how to build cars
which is pretty unlike anything our
ancestors or other animals can do we can
operate intelligently in new
environments even in completely alien
environments we can operate on the moon
we can build rockets we can attach cars
to rockets fly them to the moon and then
drive the cars on the moon and there's
nothing else on earth that can do that
yet so yeah intelligence is clearly not
a single thing and it's clearly possible
to be smart at some things and stupid at
others intelligence in one domain
doesn't automatically transfer to other
domains and so on nonetheless there is
such a thing as general intelligence
that allows an agent to act
intelligently across a wide range of
tasks and humans do have it at least to
some extent
the next argument that he makes is I
think the best argument in the article
it actually comes out of the
orthogonality thesis he's saying that
concern about AI risk comes from a
confusion between intelligence and
motivation even if we invent
superhumanly intelligent robots why
they want to enslave their masters or
take over the world he says being smart
is not the same as wanting something
this is basically a restatement of the
orthogonality thesis which is that
almost any level of intelligence is
compatible with almost any terminal goal
so this is a pretty sensible argument
saying you're proposing that AI would do
these fairly specific world domination
type actions which suggest that it has
world domination type goals but actually
it could have any goals there's no
reason to believe it we want to do bad
things to us it could just as easily
want to do good things and this is true
so far as it goes but it ignores the
argument from instrumental convergence
which is that while intelligence is
compatible with almost any terminal goal
that doesn't mean that we have no
information about instrumental goals
certain behaviors are likely to occur in
arbitrary agents because they're a good
way of achieving a wide variety of
different goals so we can make
predictions about how AI systems are
likely to behave even if we don't know
what their terminal goals are and if
that doesn't seem obvious to you I made
a whole video about instrumental
convergence which you should watch link
in the description the next thing the
article says is the scenarios that
supposedly illustrate the existential
threat to the human species of advanced
artificial intelligence are fortunately
self refuting they depend on the
premises that one humans are so gifted
that they can design an omniscient and
omnipotent AI yet so moronic that they
would give it control of the universe
without testing how it works and to the
AI would be so brilliant that it could
figure out how to transmute elements and
rewire brains yet so imbecilic that it
would wreak havoc based on elementary
blunders of misunderstanding okay so
before we get into the meat of this I
have some nitpicks firstly an AGA
doesn't have to be omniscient and
omnipotent to be far superior to humans
along all axes and it doesn't need to be
far superior to humans along with axes
in order to be very dangerous but even
accepting that this thing is extremely
powerful because that assumption is
sometimes used I object to this idea
that humans would give it control of the
universe without testing it you've said
it's omnipotent it doesn't need to be
given control of anything right if you
actually do have an omniscient
omnipotent AGI then giving it control of
the universe is pretty much just turning
it on the idea that a system like that
could be reliably contained or
controlled is pretty absurd though
that's the subject for
different video now this second part
about the AI being smart enough to be
powerful yet dumb enough to do what we
said instead of what we meant it's just
based on an inaccurate model of how
these systems work the idea is not that
the system is switched on and then given
a goal in English which it then
interprets to the best of its ability
and tries to achieve the idea is that
the goal is part of the programming of
the system you can't create an agent
with no goals something with no goals is
not an agent so he's describing it as
though the goal of the agent is to
interpret the commands that it's given
by a human and then tried to figure out
what the human meant rather than what
they said and do that if we could build
such a system well that would be
relatively safe but we can't do that we
don't know how because we don't know how
to write a program which corresponds to
what we mean when we say listen to the
commands that the humans give you and
interpret them according to the best of
your abilities and then try to do what
they mean rather than what they say this
is kind of the core of the problem
writing the code which corresponds to
that is really difficult we don't know
how to do it even with infinite
computing power and the thing is writing
something which just wants to collect
stamps or make paperclips or whatever is
way easier than writing something which
actually does what we want that's a
problem because generally speaking we
tend to do the easier thing first and
it's much easier to make an unsafe AGI
than it is to make a safe one so by
default we'd expect the first AGI
systems to be unsafe but apart from
those problems the big issue with this
part of the article is that both of
these points rely on exactly the same
simplified model of intelligence that's
criticised earlier in the article he
starts off saying that intelligence
isn't just a single monolithic thing and
being smart at one thing doesn't
automatically make you smart at other
things and then goes on to say if humans
are smart enough to design an extremely
powerful AI then they must also be smart
enough to do so safely and that's just
not true it's very possible to be smart
in one way and stupid in another so in
this specific case the question is are
humans ever smart enough to develop
extremely sophisticated and powerful
technology and yet not smart enough to
think through all of the possible
consequences and ramifications of
deploying that technology before they
deploy it and the answer here seems to
be very clearly yes yeah humans do that
a lot like all the time humans do that
and then similarly the idea that an AI
would be so brilliant that it could
transmute elements and rewire brains and
yet so imbecilic that it would wreak
havoc based on elementary blunders of
misunderstanding you can be smart at one
thing and stupid at another especially
if you're a software system and anyone
who's interacted with software systems
knows this to the point that it's a
cliche I mean you want to talk about
self-defeating arguments there are a few
more things I would want to say about
this article but there's videos long
enough as it is so I'll just close by
saying I really like Steven Pinker but
this article is just
uncharacteristically bad I agree that we
have a problem with unthinking cynical
pessimism about technology but concern
about AI risks is not just more of the
same in its most productive form it's
not even pessimism the thing is AI can
be a huge force for good but it won't be
by default we need to focus on safety
and we won't get that without suitable
concern about the risks we need to push
back against pessimism and make the
point that things are getting better and
science and technology is a big part of
the reason for that but let's not make
AI safety a casualty in that fight
[Music]
I've had some of my patrons suggested
that I try making a larger volume of
lower effort content so I'm trying an
experiment I've made a video that's just
me reading through this whole article
and adding my comments as I go it's like
45 minutes long it's kind of
unstructured rambling sort of video I'm
not sure it belongs on this channel but
I posted it to patreon so people can let
me know what they think of it so if
you're interested in seeing that kind of
experimental stuff for me consider
joining all of these amazing people and
becoming a patron and thank you so much
to everyone who does that in this video
I'm especially thanking JJ hep boy who's
been a patron for more than a year now
and has finally come up in the video
thanks rotation thank you so much for
your support JJ and thank you all for
watching I'll see you next time
[Music]